# MINI-REVIEW

# Sensing trehalose biosynthesis in plants

Oscar Goddijn1,* and Sjef Smeekens2

1Zeneca-Mogen, Einsteinweg 97,2333 CB,Leiden,The Netherlands,and

2Utrecht University, Department of Botanical Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Padualaan 8,3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

# Summary

A most unexpected finding in research on plant carbohydrate metabolism is the recent discovery that angiosperms encode genes whose products are involved in trehalose metabolism. The presence and functionality of such genes has been elegantly shown by expressing Arabidopsisderived trehalose phosphate synthase and trehalose phosphate phosphatase genes in yeast mutants lacking these enzymatic activities. Homologue sequences have now been cloned from a number of different plant species suggesting that the capacity to synthesise trehalose is ubiquitous in angiosperms. Except for Myrothamnus flabelifolius, trehalose biosynthesis has never been observed in tissues of higher plants, probably due to the presence of high levels of trehalase activity. The function of trehalose metabolism in plants is still a mystery. One of the postulated functions of trehalose metabolism in yeast is in the control of glucose repression and a similar function in sugar sensing can be proposed for plants as well.

# Introduction

Plants are able to convert carbon into a whole range of monosaccharides, several of which are precursors for the synthesis of oligo- and polysaccharides. Although a vast array of carbohydrates has been detected so far, the physiological function of many of these is unclear (Loewus and Tanner, 1982). Besides their role as a source of energy, carbohydrates can exert dramatic effects on plant growth and development by acting as elicitors or growth regulators (Creelman and Mullet, 1997). Recently, the presence of a novel carbohydrate biosynthetic pathway in plants has been reported by Vogel et al. (1998) and Bla´ zquez et al. (1998). The papers describe the identification and isolation of Arabidopsis genes involved in trehalose biosynthesis by functional complementation of yeast mutants. Trehalose

Received 6 February 1998; revised 22 February 1998; accepted 22 February 1998.

*For correspondence (fax 131 71 221471; e-mail ogoddijn@mogen.nl).

is a non-reducing disaccharide consisting of two glucose molecules. In nature, α,α-trehalose (α-D-glucopyranosyl α- D-glucopyranoside) is widespread and has been isolated from algae, bacteria, fungi, insects, invertebrates and yeasts (reviewed by Elbein, 1974), as well as from some lower vascular plants such as Selaginella lepidophylla (rose of Jericho). The presence of trehalose in angiosperms has always been questioned (Gussin, 1972) and has only been demonstrated for leaves of desiccation tolerant angiosperms such as Myrothamnus flabellifolius (Bianchi et al., 1993; Drennan et al., 1993).

# Biosynthesis and function

The biosynthesis of trehalose comprises the formation of trehalose-6-phosphate out of UDP-glucose and glucose-6- phosphate by the enzyme trehalose-6-phosphate synthase (TPS), which is subsequently dephosphorylated into trehalose by the enzyme trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase (TPP) (Cabib and Leloir, 1958). The hydrolysis of trehalose can occur in a variety of ways, in Euglena gracilis and Pichia fermentans by trehalose phosphorylase (Belocopitow and Mare´ chal, 1970; Schick et al., 1995), in Escherichia coli by phosphorylation and subsequent hydrolysis by trehalose-6-phosphate hydrolase (Rimmele and Boos, 1994), and in plants, fungi, animals and bacteria via the enzyme trehalase (Horlacher et al., 1996; Kendall et al., 1990; Mu¨ ller et al., 1995; Nwaka et al., 1995; Sacktor, 1968). Trehalase activity has been detected in a wide range of higher plants thereby occupying a peculiar position since trehalose seems not to be present in most plants.

In E. coli, endogenously synthesised trehalose functions as a protectant against osmotic stress (reviewed in Stro¨ m and Kaasen, 1993) while in yeasts trehalose has a dual function, both as a storage carbohydrate and as a stress protection metabolite, especially under starvation conditions (Thevelein, 1996). Insects have trehalose present in their haemolymph (blood) at concentrations as high as $1 - 2 \%$ (Becker et al., 1996).

# Trehalose in plants

Trehalose was first isolated from the resurrection plant S. lepidophylla and subsequently was found in other pteridophytes investigated. S. lepidophylla becomes dormant during dry periods and revives when water is again available. During extreme drought, levels of trehalose reach up to $20 \%$ in its leaves possibly protecting cell structures and

components from denaturation. The general absence of trehalose from desiccation-tolerant seeds and pollen has led to the suggestion that higher plants have lost the ability to produce trehalose (Crowe et al., 1992). Trehalose was also detected in the desiccation-tolerant angiosperm M. flabellifolius,but there is only a slight dehydration-associated increase in the trehalose levels (Drennan et al., 1993).

In the last few years, there has been a growing interest in the application of trehalose metabolism to engineer drought tolerant crops. Moreover, trehalose can be used as a stabilising agent in preserving biomolecules such as enzymes and to preserve fresh characteristics of dried or frozen foodstuffs (Goddijn and Pen, 1995). To reach these goals, trehalose biosynthesis was engineered in Arabidopsis (Sung Soo Jun and S.Smeekens，unpublished observations), tobacco (Goddijn et al., 1997; Holmstro¨ m et al.,1996; Romero et al.,1997) and potato plants (Goddijn et al.1997) by the expression of TPS and TPP encoding genes from E. coli or yeast. Limited amounts of trehalose accumulated in these transgenic crops, but an increase in drought-tolerance was noted using a detached leaf assay (Holmstro¨ m et al., 1996) or with intact plants (Pilon-Smits et al.,1998; Romero et al.,1997). One reason for the low level of trehalose accumulation was shown to be its hydrolysis by trehalase. Inhibition of trehalase activity using validamycin A resulted in enhanced trehalose accumulation in transgenic plants (Goddijn et al., 1997).

# Plant derived tps and tpp genes

Comparison of the E. coli and yeast derived tps and tpp genes with plant database sequences reveals the presence of significantly homologous EST clones derived from Arabidopsis and rice.Further PCR screenings of plants such as tobacco, potato and sunflower with degenerated tps or tpp based primer-sets and subsequent sequence analysis readily revealed the presence of homologous genes (O. Goddijn et al., unpublished observations). These observations strongly suggest that the capacity to synthesise trehalose is present throughout the angiosperms. However, the mere presence of homologous genes is not proof of their functionality. This latter question was recently addressed by Bla´ zquez et al. (1998) and Vogel et al. (1998) who show that Arabidopsis-derived tps- and tpp-homologous genes can functionally complement yeast mutants in trehalose biosynthesis. Vogel et al. use an elegant and simple assay to complement a heat-sensitive yeast tps2 mutant lacking trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase activity by expressing an Arabidopsis cDNA library in this mutant. The mutant is able to survive at $3 8 . 6 ^ { \circ } \complement$ only by converting the accumulating trehalose-6-phosphate into trehalose. Two Arabidopsis genes are identified, AtTPPA and AtTTPB, that both complemented the yeast mutant by encoding TPP. Bla´ zquez et al. identified an Arabidopsis tps gene

(AtTPS1) by complementing the tps1 mutant from S.cerevisiae which is unable to grow on glucose but grows on galactose. Both papers show that the isolated genes are expressed at low levels in Arabidopsis. AtTPPA and B are predominantly expressed in young developing seedlings and in developing flowers of mature plants, whereas AtTPS1 is expressed in a non-organ specific way. Since the function of TPS and TPP in plants is unknown (see below), these patterns of expression are hard to explain. Yet, the EST data available and the information presented in the papers show that both tps and tpp are encoded by multigene families (of which the members may share less then $70 \%$ homology). These gene families may have different patterns of expression. In addition, some of these EST sequences may represent homologues of the yeast TPS3 and TSL1 sequences (both very similar to TPS and TPP) which encode regulatory subunits of the trehalose synthase complex (Reinders et al., 1997).

# Function of trehalose biosynthesis in plants

The question raised by Gussin in 1972 ‘Does trehalose occur in angiospermae?’ now seems to be answered by an irrefutable ‘yes’. It is now evident that trehalose is present throughout the animal, fungal, bacterial and plant kingdom indicating its ancient evolutionary history. Although the biosynthesis of sucrose closely resembles that of trehalose, its evolutionary origin is probably of a much later date since this molecule is synthesized only in plants and a few cyanobacteria. With this knowledge, it is puzzling that the synthesis of trehalose in angiosperms has never been described. Probably, the presence of trehalase activity in all plant tissues prevents the accumulation of trehalose. Only when an inhibitor of trehalase activity, validamycin A, is applied during plant growth, minute amounts of trehalose can be detected in wild-type tobacco and potato plants (Goddijn et al., 1997). Most likely, the fluks through the trehalose biosynthetic pathway of plants is very low in order to prevent a futile cycle which generates glucose out of UDP-glucose and glucose-6-phosphate at the expense of ATP.

In view of the low amounts of trehalose present in plants it seems unlikely that trehalose has an important function in stress protection in plants. Trehalose has also been proposed to be an early, broad-spectrum agent preventing symbioses between susceptible plants and trehalose-producing micro-organisms (reviewed in Mellor, 1992), although this view has not been supported by any evidence thus far. In the paper by Vogel et al. (1998) it is suggested that trehalose or related metabolites might have a function as regulators of plant growth and development. This is corroborated by the findings that plants overexpressing a heterologous tps gene from yeast or E. coli show severe

morphological alterations (Goddijn et al., 1997; Romero et al., 1997).

Yeast mutants which lack a functional tps-gene are sensitive to added glucose due to an uncontrolled influx of glucose into glycolysis. Trehalose-6-phosphate is able to inhibit hexokinase (HXK2) activity in vitro (Bla´ zquez et al., 1993) and possibly controls the influx of glucose by inhibiting hexokinase (HXK) in vivo (Thevelein and Hohmann, 1995). It was suggested that HXK is an important signalling molecule that initiates glucose repression in yeast. By controlling HXK activity, t6p may be a regulator of glucoseinduced signalling and one can speculate about a similar function of trehalose metabolism in plants. Thus, trehalose biosynthesis in plants may play a role in the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism or the perception of carbohydrate availability. In plants, hexokinases (HXK) have been implicated in sugar-sensing (Jang et al., 1997) even though the importance of this system is under dispute (Ehness et al.,1997; Herbers et al.,1996). In addition to the HXKdependent pathway, several other sugar-sensing mechanisms appear to be present and our understanding of these signalling pathways is rapidly increasing (Jang and Sheen, 1997; Smeekens and Rook, 1997). In yeast, a trehalose synthase complex was identified harboring TPS, TPP and a regulatory activity (Londesborough and Vuorio, 1993). The presence of TPS- and TPP-activity in plants without the accumulation of their respective products may be explained by a possible association with other proteins in an enzymatic complex. Candidates for such proteins would be hexokinases, sugar transporters and other sensory proteins involved in the sensing of carbohydrates.

Although no function of the tps and tpp genes in plants can be assigned yet, the finding that these are present and functional in angiosperms will arouse a lot of scientific interest which will undoubtedly result in the elucidation of their role in plant development and physiology.

# References

Becker A., Schlo¨ der, P., Steele, J.E. and Wegener, G. (1996) The regulation of trehalose metabolism in insects. Experientia, 52, 433–439.   
Belocopitow, E. and Mare´ chal, E. (1970) Trehalose phosphorylase from Euglena gracilis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 198, 151–154.   
Bianchi, G., Gamba, A., Limiroli, R., Pozzi, N., Elster, R., Salamini, F. and Bartels, D. (1993) The unusual sugar composition in leaves of the resurrection plant Myrothamnus flabellifolia. Physiol Plant.87,223-226.   
Bla´ zquez, M.A., Lagunas, R., Gancedo, C. and Gancedo, J.M. (1993) Trehalose-6-phosphate, a new regulator of yeast glycolysis that inhibits hexokinases. FEBS Lett, 329, 51–54.   
Bla´ zquez, M.A., Santos, E., Flores, C.-L., Martı´nez-Zapater, J.M., Salinas, J. and Gancedo, C. (1998) Isolation and characterisation of the Arabidopsis TPS1 gene, encoding trehalose-6-phosphate synthase. Plant J. 13, 685–689.   
Cabib, E. and Leloir, L.F. (1958) The biosynthesis of trehalose phosphate J. Biol. Chem. 231, 259–275.

Creelman, R.A. and Mullet, J.E. (1997) Oligosaccharins, Brassinolides, and Jasmonates: Nontraditional regulators of plant growth, development and gene expression. Plant Cell, 9, 1211–1223.   
Crowe, J.H., Hoekstra, F.A. and Crowe, L.M. (1992) Anhydrobiosis. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol.54, 579-599.   
Drennan, P.M., Smith, M.T., Goldsworthy, D. and van Staden, J. (1993) The occurrence of trehalose in the leaves of the desiccation-tolerant angiosperm Myrothamnus flabellifolius Welw. J. Plant Physiol. 142, 493–496.   
Ehness, R., Ecker, M., Godt, D.E. and Roitsch, T. (1997) Glucose and stress independently regulate source and sink metabolism and defense mechanisms via signal transduction pathways involving protein phosphorylation. Plant Cell, 9, 1825–1841.   
Elbein, A.D. (1974) The metabolism of α,α-trehalose. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem.Biochem.30,227-256.   
Goddijn, O.J.M. and Pen, J. (1995) Plants as bioreactors. Trends Biotechnol. 13,379-387.   
Goddijn, O.J.M., Verwoerd, T.C., Voogd, E., Krutwagen, P.W.H.H., deGraaf, P.T.H.M., Poels, J., vanDun, K., Ponstein, A.S., Damm, B. and Pen, J. (1997) Inhibition of trehalase activity enhances trehalose accumulation in transgenic plants. Plant Physiol. 113, 181–190.   
Gussin, A.E.S. (1972) Does trehalose occur in angiospermae? Phytochemistry, 11,1827-1828.   
Herbers, K., Meuwly, P., Frommer, W.B., Metraux, J.P. and Sonnewald, U. (1996) Systemic acquired resistance mediated by the ectopic expression of invertase: possible hexose sensing in the secretory pathway. Plant Cell, 8, 793–803.   
Holmstro¨ m, K.O., Mantyla, E., Welin, B., Mandal, A. and Palva, E.T. (1996) Drought tolerance in tobacco. Nature, 379, 683–684.   
Horlacher, R., Uhland, K., Klein, W., Ehrmann, M. and Boos, W. (1996) Characterization of a cytoplasmic trehalase of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol.178,6250-6257.   
Jang, J.C., Le´on, P., Zhou, L. and Sheen, J. (1997) Hexokinase as a sugar sensor in higher plants. Plant Cell, 9, 5–19.   
Jang, J.C. and Sheen, J. (1997) Sugar sensing in higher plants. Trends in Plant Sci. 2, 208-214.   
Kendall, E.J., Adams, R.P. and Kartha, K.K. (1990) Trehalase activity in plant tissue cultures. Phytochemistry, 29, 2525–2528.   
Loewus, F.A. and Tanner, W. (eds) (1982) Plant Carbohydrates I, Intracellular Carbohydrates.Berlin: Springer-Verlag.   
Londesborough, J. and Vuorio, O.E. (1993) Purification of trehalose synthase from baker’s yeast – its temperature-dependent activation by fructose 6-phosphate and inhibition by phosphate. EurJ.Biochem.216,841-848.   
Mellor, R.B. (1992) Is trehalose a symbiotic determinant in symbioses between higher plants and microorganisms? Symbiosis, 12, 113-129.   
Mu¨ ller, J., Boller, T. and Wiemken, A. (1995) Trehalose and trehalase in plants: recent developments. Plant Science, 112, 1–9.   
Nwaka, S., Kopp, M. and Holzer, H. (1995) Expression and function of the trehalase genes NTH1 and YBR0106 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.J. Biol. Chem.270,10193-10198.   
Pilon-Smits, E.A.H., Terry, N., Sears, T. et al. (1998) Trehaloseproducing transgenic tobacco plants show improved growth performance under drought stress. J. Plant Physiol. in press.   
Reinders, A., Burckert, N., Hohmann, S., Thevelein, J.M., Boller, T., Wiemken, A. and DeVirgilio, C. (1997) Structural analysis of the subunits of the trehalose-6-phosphate synthase/ phosphatase complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and their function during heat shock. Mol. Microbiol. 24, 687–695.   
Rimmele, M. and Boos, W. (1994) Trehalose-6-phosphate hydrolase of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 176, 5654–5664.

Romero, C., Belle´ s, J.M., Vaya, J.L., Serrano, R. and CulianezMacia, F.A. (1997) Expression of the yeast trehalose-6-phosphate synthase gene in transgenic tobacco plants: Pleiotropic phenotypes include drought tolerance. Planta, 201, 293–297.   
Sacktor, B. (1968) Trehalase and the transport of glucose in the mammalian kidney and intestine. NAS, 60, 1007–1014.   
Schick, I., Haltrich, D. and Kulbe, K.D. (1995) Trehalose phosphorylase from Pichia fermentans and its role in the metabolism of trehalose. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 43, 1088–1095.   
Smeekens, S. and Rook, F. (1997) Sweet sensations: Sugar sensing and sugar-mediated signal transduction in plants. Plant Physiol. 115, 7–13.

Stro¨ m, A.R. and Kaasen, I. (1993) Trehalose metabolism in Escherichia coli- Stress protection and stress regulation of gene expression. Mol. Microbiol. 8, 205–210.   
Thevelein, J.M. (1996) Regulation of trehalose metabolism and its relevance to cell growth and function. In The Mycota (Brambl, R. and Marzluf, G.A., eds). Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 395–420.   
Thevelein, J.M. and Hohmann, S. (1995) Trehalose synthase: guard to the gate of glycolysis in yeast? Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 3–10.   
Vogel, G., Aeschbacher, R.A., Mu¨ ller, J., Boller, T. and Wiemken, A. (1998) Trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatases from Arabidopsis thaliana: ldentification by functional complementation of the yeast tps2 mutant. Plant J. 13, 673–683.